emissions changes (#140)
latent-to/developer-docs: docs/learn/emissions.md

1. **Track net flows**: Each block, record TAO inflows from staking and outflows from unstaking:
   $$\text{net\_flow}_i = \sum \text{TAO staked} - \sum \text{TAO unstaked}$$

2. **Calculate EMA**: Update the 30-day EMA of net flows (smoothing factor $\alpha \approx 0.000003209$):
   $$S_i = (1 - \alpha) \cdot S_{i-1} + \alpha \cdot \text{net\_flow}_i$$

3. **Apply offset and clipping**: Calculate offset flows by subtracting the lower limit $L$:
   $$z_i = \max(S_i - L, 0)$$
   where $L = \max(\text{FlowCutoff}, \min_{j} \min(S_j, 0))$
   
   Subnets with $S_i \leq L$ (i.e., subnets with negative net flows) receive zero emissions .

4. **Power normalization**: Apply power $p$ (default = 1.5) to amplify differences:
   $$\text{share}_{\text{flow}}(i) = \frac{z_i^p}{\sum_{j \in \mathbb{S}} z_j^p}$$

The power parameter creates winner-takes-more dynamics: a subnet with 2× the flow receives approximately 2.83× the emissions.

**Key Parameters** ([source](https://github.com/opentensor/subtensor/blob/main/pallets/subtensor/src/lib.rs#L1278-L1348)):
- EMA half-life: 216,000 blocks (30 days)

> - Power exponent: $p = 1.5$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Power exponent: $p = 1.0$
```

  - [Stake/Unstake Flow Tracking](https://github.com/opentensor/subtensor/blob/main/pallets/subtensor/src/staking/stake_utils.rs)

### Injection

The first stage of emissions is _injection of liquidity_ into the subnet pools. Liquidity is injected to each subnet based on either price (legacy model) or net TAO flows (new model), or a weighted combination during the transition period.

Each block:

- **TAO is injected** into the subnet's **TAO reserve** — the amount for each subnet is determined by the emission distribution formula (see below)
- **Alpha is injected** into the subnet's **alpha reserve** — proportional to TAO injection to maintain price stability
- **Alpha is allocated** to _alpha outstanding_ — set aside to be extracted by participants (miners, validators, stakers, subnet owner)

#### How TAO is Distributed Across Subnets

The distribution of TAO emissions across subnets is currently transitioning from a **price-based model** to a **flow-based model**:

**Price-Based Model (Legacy, being phased out by December 2025)**
- Emissions proportional to subnet token price

> - Rewards expensive tokens regardless of actual usage

Reviewer: It's rather a problem that it builds up liquidity at X price and makes it harder for a subnet to move away from price X, so those tokens that have a high ALPHA price got a lot of stake in the beginning, but even if everyone would unstake they couldn' drop to 0% emissions (have the lowest price)

Given set $\mathbb{S}$ of all subnets, and a total per block TAO emission $\Delta\bar{\tau}$ (currently 1 TAO, following a halving schedule), the price-based emission share for subnet $i$ with price $p_i$ is:

$$
\text{share}_{\text{price}}(i) = \frac{p_i}{\sum_{j \in \mathbb{S}} p_j}
$$

This model rewards subnets with higher token prices but doesn't account for actual usage or value creation.

</details>

<details>
  <summary><strong>Flow-Based Formula (New Model)</strong></summary>

The flow-based model uses an Exponential Moving Average (EMA) of net TAO flows (staking minus unstaking) over a 30-day period:

1. **Track net flows**: Each block, record TAO inflows from staking and outflows from unstaking:
   $$\text{net\_flow}_i = \sum \text{TAO staked} - \sum \text{TAO unstaked}$$

2. **Calculate EMA**: Update the 30-day EMA of net flows (smoothing factor $\alpha \approx 0.000003209$):
   $$S_i = (1 - \alpha) \cdot S_{i-1} + \alpha \cdot \text{net\_flow}_i$$

3. **Apply offset and clipping**: Calculate offset flows by subtracting the lower limit $L$:
   $$z_i = \max(S_i - L, 0)$$
   where $L = \max(\text{FlowCutoff}, \min_{j} \min(S_j, 0))$
   

>    Subnets with $S_i \leq L$ receive zero emissions (typically subnets with negative net flows).

Reviewer: Not typically but because of the defined `TaoFlowCutoff` (which is set to 0)

**Key Parameters** ([source](https://github.com/opentensor/subtensor/blob/main/pallets/subtensor/src/lib.rs#L1278-L1348)):
- EMA half-life: 216,000 blocks (30 days)
- Power exponent: $p = 1.5$
- Flow cutoff: 0 (only negative flows clipped by default)

**Implementation**: Flow tracking occurs in [`record_tao_inflow()`](https://github.com/opentensor/subtensor/blob/main/pallets/subtensor/src/coinbase/subnet_emissions.rs#L35-L47) and [`record_tao_outflow()`](https://github.com/opentensor/subtensor/blob/main/pallets/subtensor/src/coinbase/subnet_emissions.rs#L49-L59), called during stake and unstake operations.

</details>

<details>
  <summary><strong>Transition Formula (November - December 2025)</strong></summary>

During the transition period, emission shares are a weighted combination of both models:

$$
\text{share}(i) = w \cdot \text{share}_{\text{flow}}(i) + (1 - w) \cdot \text{share}_{\text{price}}(i)
$$

where the flow weight $w$ increases linearly over 216,000 blocks:

$$
w = \frac{\text{current\_block} - \text{start\_block}}{216000}
$$

- At block 0: $w = 0$ (100% price-based)
- At block 108,000: $w = 0.5$ (50/50 blend)

> - At block 216,000+: $w = 1$ (100% flow-based)

Reviewer: This has already been explained around line 70

Author: yes but this has the math, which is maybe distracting in the first concise description. i think it's worth having both especially since this is hidden

Each block, liquidity is also set aside to be emitted to participants (validators, miners, stakers, and subnet creator). The quantity per block is equal to the _alpha emission rate_ $\Delta\bar{\alpha_i}$ for subnet $i$.

:::warning Important for Subnet Owners
Under the new flow-based model, subnets with negative net TAO flows (more unstaking than staking) will receive **zero TAO emissions** and consequently **zero alpha injection**. This means:

- No liquidity growth for the subnet pool
- Higher slippage for users trying to stake
- Difficulty attracting new participants

To maintain positive emissions, subnet owners should focus on:
- Building genuine utility that attracts long-term stakers

> - Covering operational expenses through OTC sales rather than pool unstaking

Reviewer: > Covering operational expenses through OTC sales rather than pool unstaking

Should that actually be a recommendation from the docs?

Each block, liquidity is also set aside to be emitted to participants (validators, miners, stakers, and subnet creator). The quantity per block is equal to the _alpha emission rate_ $\Delta\bar{\alpha_i}$ for subnet $i$.

:::warning Important for Subnet Owners

> Under the new flow-based model, subnets with negative net TAO flows (more unstaking than staking) will receive **zero TAO emissions** and consequently **zero alpha injection**. This means:

Reviewer: We should either point out that if that happens over a longer time period, or just directly when their EMA flow becomes negative. Otherwise they might fear that if for one day it's negative they will lose TAO emissions etc.

Author: ```suggestion
Under the new flow-based model, subnets that have negative net TAO flows (more unstaking than staking) for sufficiently long will receive **zero TAO emissions** and consequently **zero alpha injection**. This means:
```
